Add article explaining upcoming i18n class changes (#98)
cakephp/bakery.cakephp.org: 2022/03/12/rename_date_time_classes.rst

Date and Time Mutability and Renaming
=====================================

The upcoming CakePHP 4.4 release includes the first of a series of changes that affect
all users of CakePHP's i18n datetime classes. In the end, CakePHP will support immutable
classes only with more consistent names that allow for time-only variations.

Let's begin with the changes in CakePHP 4.4:

* The mutable class ``Cake\I18n\Date`` is deprecated in favor of ``Cake\I18n\FrozenDate``.
* The mutable class ``Cake\I18n\Time`` is deprecated in favor of ``Cake\I18n\FrozenTime``.

With these deprecations, users are expected to plan for immutable classes only by the time

> CakePHP 5 is released. That release which will include:
> 
> * The deprecated classes are dropped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CakePHP 5 is released. The CakePHP 5 release will contain several breaking changes:

* The deprecated `Cake\I18n\Date` and `Cake\I18n\Time` compatibility aliases will be dropped.
```

> * ``Cake\I18n\FrozenDate`` is renamed to ``Cake\I18n\Date``.
> * ``Cake\I18n\FrozenTime`` is renamed to ``Cake\I18n\DateTime``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``Cake\I18n\FrozenDate`` wlll be renamed to ``Cake\I18n\Date``.
* ``Cake\I18n\FrozenTime`` will be renamed to ``Cake\I18n\DateTime``.
```

These changes drop the mutable classes entirely. However, instead of just dropping the
previously deprecated classes, this effectively includes a rename. We are making this sligtly
awkward change at the same time to clear up our naming convention as well as provide a path
towards a time-only, i18n class. Having a ``Time`` and ``TimeOnly`` class together would
not be great for users.

The name ``DateTime`` was chosen to line up with PHP's class names as well as better represent
what it supports. Since we are renaming the classes, dropping the awkward ``Frozen`` prefix
made sense. Unfortunately, this could be confusing for users who are jumping from earlier CakePHP 4

> releases to CakePHP 5 or a double-effort for users following deprecations with each point release.

Reviewer: I half wonder if we're setting ourselves up for future pain here. While reusing `DateTime` as our class name is convenient for us as it is the best name. However, our `DateTime` class and PHP's `DateTime` class behave very differently, and there are scenarios where you might want to use `\DateTime`. The difference is low impact while you're writing code, but it is impactful when **reading** code.

When reading code I now need to pain a great deal of attention to *which* `DateTime` a block of code is using. Is it the mutable PHP one, or the immutable one from CakePHP?

```php
// Making an instance
$date = new DateTime();

// In a method/return type
public function doSomething(DateTime $date): DateTime
```

In both these examples and many other options it is not easy at a glance to know what implementation is used, which makes it harder to check if the surrounding scope is also correct.

Could we retain `FrozenDateTime` and `FrozenDate`?  These names have none of the issues outlined above and give us a deprecation path in chronos as well.

Author: We hypothesized that users wouldn't often mix the two together. We would internally use `NativeDateTime` aliases when doing so. However, I agree that conflicting with native types is non-optimal. 

Using a name like Chronos only works when in the context of a self-named library, and even then it's kinda confusing.

Author: We could keep `Frozen` prefix. I think it suggest you can't change it not that the class is immutable, but users already use the name.

`FrozenDateTime` extending `Chronos` is just a hot mess IMO.

Reviewer 2: I too agree that naming our class the same as PHP's hinders readability but `FrozenDateTime` is a wacky name and I quite dislike it. While existing users might be familiar with how it behaves it's not intuitive for new users.

`FrozenDateTime` extending `Chronos` has also been a cause for confusion but what's the alternative? Have the i18n class decorate `Chronos` instead of extending it?

Author: > `FrozenDateTime` extending `Chronos` has also been a cause for confusion but what's the alternative? Have the i18n class decorate `Chronos` instead of extending it?

I meant having a special name like Frozen extending a library-specific moniker Chronos feels worse than having to deal with DateTime aliases, IMO.

I think the frameworks and PHP itself fell into the same trap of not forward naming. PHP's DateTime should have been MutableDateTime.

Reviewer: > Using a name like Chronos only works when in the context of a self-named library, and even then it's kinda confusing.

:100: agree. We could drop that alias as well and only use `Chronos` class prefix on the interface names. We could also ensure that both `FrozenDate`, `FrozenTime` and `FrozenDateTime` implement this interface.

> PHP's DateTime should have been MutableDateTime.

Agree but we can't change PHP, so we have to compensate a bit by choosing a name that is clearer and doesn't overlap with PHP core. One nice bit about the `Frozen` prefix is that will autocomplete to a small number of options faster than unprefixed names would :smile:

I am starting to think we should plan out what we want to do with `chronos` before we communicate changes outward. Are you ok with delaying this a bit @othercorey until we have a more defined design for chronos?

Author: > I am starting to think we should plan out what we want to do with `chronos` before we communicate changes outward. Are you ok with delaying this a bit @othercorey until we have a more defined design for chronos?

Yes, that's ok with me. We're still deprecating mutable classes in 4.4 though. I suppose users can follow that on their own for now.
